EEE 515
ASSIGNMENT 3
Spring 2025
First Submission due on Sunday, March 30th at 11:59 pm
Answer all problems following the instructions. You must use the Latex template
for your solutions. Please compile the Latex template and submit the PDF report
to Canvas.
Instruction Guidelines:
Please use the Latex template for your solutions. Presentation is very important (and worth 10%
of the grade). For every problem, you will write up your solution, assign yourself a numerical
grade with reasons/justification for the grade, and acknowledge any web sources, classmate
help that you used in this assignment. Note: ChatGPT usage is allowed for problems, but you
are responsible for ensuring the validity of its solutions and justifications. Also note that writing
of the report can also use genAI tools, but your reasons/justifications/explanations in the report
should be backed up with evidence (figures, numerical calculations, etc.) wherever possible.
Problem 1. (Image Classification with PyTorch) (20 points)
This problem is designed to familiarize you with PyTorch, the main software package we will be
using in this class for training deep learning models.
1. PyTorch 60-Minute Blitz
Go through the PyTorch 60-Minute Blitz tutorial from https://pytorch.org/tutorials/
beginner/deep_learning_60min_blitz.html and complete the sections on Tensors, A
Gentle Introduction to torch.autograd, and Neural Networks. These sections will
introduce you to the basic concepts of PyTorch, which are crucial for understanding the
tasks below.
2. Investigating Bias in Image Classification (10 points)
Try the experiment of dataset bias featured in https://arxiv.org/pdf/1911.11834.pdf
Create two datasets: (1) Take five of the ten classes, and convert all the images in those
classes to grayscale, and then stack the same gray image 3 times into the RGB channels.
Leave the other five classes the same. (2) Convert all data to grayscale, stack the same gray
image 3 times into the RGB channels. Report the accuracy of the previous neural network
on Datasets (1) and (2). Which one performs better? Try one of the strategies mentioned
in the paper to mitigate bias (doesn’t have to be the paper’s method, it can be one of the
baselines). Discuss what your strategy was and how you implemented it.
3. PCA Comparison (10 points)
Compare your classification network versus a machine learning baseline of principle com-
ponent analysis (PCA), following approaches in the literature, for example:https:
//sites.cs.ucsb.edu/~mturk/Papers/mturk-CVPR91.pdf, https://ieeexplore.ieee.
org/document/8038237, https://www.mdpi.com/2073-8994/11/1/1. Describe your PCA
method in detail (with equations) and report the accuracy of a PCA approach to your own
neural network. It would be helpful to show your principal components for classes, or any
other interpretable information that you get from PCA.
1
Problem 2. Vision Transformer (Segmentation Task)(30 points)
In this problem, we will explore the task of image segmentation using a pretrained model and
build a small application around it. You will apply segmentation to a selfie image, simulate a
blurred background effect, and use monocular depth estimation to create realistic lens blur.
1. Explore the Hugging Face Segmentation Models Library for image segmentation. Choose
any model of your choice. Take a picture of a foreground object against a complex back-
ground, and demonstrate that the chosen model can successfully segment the foreground
from the background.
Display the input image and the output mask, where the back-
ground should be completely black, and only the foreground object should appear in white.
(5 points)
2. Add a Gaussian blur with σ = 15 to the background of the segmented image, leaving the
foreground sharp. This simulates the background blur effect often seen in video conferencing
tools like Zoom. Display the input image and the output image with blurred background
side by side. (5 points)
3. Explore the Hugging Face Monocular Depth